**Read it first**, project has moved to:

  https://gitbio.ens-lyon.fr/LBMC/yvertlab/mylabstocks



















Readme / Documentation for *MyLabStocks*
****************************************

*MyLabStocks* is a web application allowing to easily store, share and
retrieve information about molecular biology materials stored in a
laboratory.


License
=======

Copyright CNRS 2012-2013

* Florent CHUFFART

* Gael YVERT

The Software is provided “as is” without warranty of any kind, either
express or implied, including without limitation any implied
warranties of condition, uninterrupted use, merchantability, fitness
for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. You use this software
at your own risk.

This software is governed by the CeCILL license under French law and
abiding by the rules of distribution of free software.  You can  use,
modify and/ or redistribute the software under the terms of the CeCILL
license as circulated by CEA, CNRS and INRIA at the following URL
"http://www.cecill.info".

As a counterpart to the access to the source code and  rights to copy,
modify and redistribute granted by the license, users are provided
only  with a limited warranty  and the software's author,  the holder
of the economic rights,  and the successive licensors  have only
limited liability.

This software is provided with absolutely NO WARRANTY. The authors can
not be held responsible, even partially, for any damage, loss,
financial loss or any other undesired facts resulting from the use of
the software.

In this respect, the user's attention is drawn to the risks associated
with loading,  using,  modifying and/or developing or reproducing the
software by the user in light of its specific status of free software,
that may mean  that it is complicated to manipulate,  and  that  also
therefore means  that it is reserved for developers  and  experienced
professionals having in-depth computer knowledge. Users are therefore
encouraged to load and test the software's suitability as regards
their requirements in conditions enabling the security of their
systems and/or data to be ensured and,  more generally, to use and
operate it in the same conditions as regards security.

The fact that you are presently reading this means that you have had
knowledge of the CeCILL license and that you accept its terms.


Installation Instructions
=========================

This installation has been fully tested on:
   * Debian 7.2.0 amd64 netinst [1], running on virtual machine
     using Oracle VM VirtualBox [2] for macosx (dev)

   * Ubuntu Server 12.04.3 LTSUbuntu server LTS [3], running on
     physical machine (prod)

[1] http://cdimage.debian.org/debian-cd/7.2.0/amd64/iso-
cd/debian-7.2.0-amd64-netinst.iso

[2] https://www.virtualbox.org

[3] http://www.ubuntu.com/download/server


Prerequisites
-------------

Prior to installing MyLabStocks, a number of packages must be
installed on your system. Git is used to retrieve MyLabStocks sources.
MySQL, Apache and phpMyAdmin ensure web and database services, it
needs php5 and php5-curl packages. Tomcat6 will support advanced
plasmid visualisation services (PlasMapper), it needs openjdk-6-jdk
and ant. Finally, BLAST is used to analyse sequences, it needs csh.

On the targeted server, you can install these packages by typing the
following command in a terminal.

   sudo apt-get install git apache2 mysql-server php5 php5-curl phpmyadmin tomcat6 ant openjdk-6-jdk blast2 csh


Get MyLabStocks Sources
-----------------------

The first installation step is to retrieve the source code of
MyLabStocks. You can do this by typing the following command in a
terminal.

   git clone https://github.com/fchuffar/mylabstocks


Install wwwBLAST
----------------

MyLabStocks uses BLAST queries for several of its features, wwwBLAST
is a web interface which provides access to this feature in a user-
friendly way.

MyLabStocks is distributed with wwwBLAST working on a x64
architecture. For other architectures, please refer to the NCBI
repositories http://mirrors.vbi.vt.edu/mirrors/ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/blast
/executables/release/LATEST

On the targeted server type the following commands in a terminal.

   cd mylabstocks/opts/
   tar xfvz wwwblast-2.2.26-x64-linux.tar.gz
   sudo cp -r blast /var/www/.
   sudo chown www-data:www-data /var/www/blast/TmpGifs /var/www/blast/*.log /var/www/blast/db/

   echo "Alias /blast /var/www/blast/" > /tmp/blast.conf
   echo "<Directory /var/www/blast/>" > /tmp/blast.conf
   echo "   Options +ExecCGI" >> /tmp/blast.conf
   echo "</Directory>" >> /tmp/blast.conf
   echo "AddHandler cgi-script .cgi" >> /tmp/blast.conf
   sudo cp /tmp/blast.conf /etc/apache2/conf.d/blast.conf
   sudo ln -s ../conf.d/blast.conf /etc/apache2/conf-available/blast.conf
   sudo ln -s ../conf-available/blast.conf /etc/apache2/conf-enabled/blast.conf
   rm /tmp/blast.conf
   sudo /etc/init.d/apache2 restart
   sudo sed -i 's/<option VALUE.*test_na_db/<option VALUE=oligostock_db>oligostock_db<option VALUE=plasmidstock_db>plasmidstock_db<option VALUE=plfeatstock_db>plfeatstock_db/g' /var/www/blast/blast.html
   sudo sed -i 's/<option VALUE.*test_aa_db//g' /var/www/blast/blast.html
   cat /var/www/blast/blast.rc > /tmp/blast.rc
   echo "blastn oligostock_db" >> /tmp/blast.rc
   echo "tblastn oligostock_db" >> /tmp/blast.rc
   echo "tblastx oligostock_db" >> /tmp/blast.rc
   echo "blastn plasmidstock_db" >> /tmp/blast.rc
   echo "tblastn plasmidstock_db" >> /tmp/blast.rc
   echo "tblastx plasmidstock_db" >> /tmp/blast.rc
   echo "blastn plfeatstock_db" >> /tmp/blast.rc
   echo "tblastn plfeatstock_db" >> /tmp/blast.rc
   echo "tblastx plfeatstock_db" >> /tmp/blast.rc
   sudo cp /tmp/blast.rc /var/www/blast/blast.rc
   rm /tmp/blast.rc
   cd ../..

Now you have a wwwBLAST instance available here:
http://your_server/blast.


Install PlasMapper
------------------

PlasMapper provides advanced plasmid visualisation features. We use it
to produced annoted plasmid maps. To install it, type the following
command under a targeted server terminal.

   cd mylabstocks/opts/
   tar xfvz PlasMapper_download.tar.gz
   cd PlasMapper
   # modify installdir as /var/lib/tomcat6
   sed -i 's/\/home\/tomcat/\/var\/lib\/tomcat6/g' build.xml
   # modify servletjar as /usr/share/tomcat6/lib/servlet-api.jar
   sed -i 's/${installdir}\/common\/lib\/servlet-api.jar/\/usr\/share\/tomcat6\/lib\/servlet-api.jar/g' build.xml
   # change /home/tomcat for /var/lib/tomcat6
   sed -i 's/\/home\/tomcat/\/var\/lib\/tomcat6/g' src/ca/ualberta/xdong/plasMapper/annotate/plasMapConfiguration_en_CA.properties
   # and set blastallDir=/usr/bin/
   sed -i 's/\/usr\/local\/bin\//\/usr\/bin\//g' src/ca/ualberta/xdong/plasMapper/annotate/plasMapConfiguration_en_CA.properties
   # After these steps, PlasMapper is ready to be configured
   ant clean
   ant build
   sudo ant install
   sudo rm -Rf /var/lib/tomcat6/webapps/PlasMapper/tmp
   sudo ln -s /tmp/tomcat6-tomcat6-tmp/ /var/lib/tomcat6/webapps/PlasMapper/tmp
   echo '<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><Context path="/myapp" allowLinking="true"></Context>' > context.xml
   sudo mv context.xml /var/lib/tomcat6/webapps/PlasMapper/META-INF/
   sudo /etc/init.d/tomcat6 restart
   # After these steps, PlasMapper works on your server at the url http://myserver:8080/PlasMapper
   sudo chown root:www-data /var/lib/tomcat6/webapps/PlasMapper/dataBase/db_vectorFeature/*.*
   sudo chmod 664 /var/lib/tomcat6/webapps/PlasMapper/dataBase/db_vectorFeature/*.*
   sudo chown root:www-data /var/lib/tomcat6/webapps/PlasMapper/dataBase/db_vectorFeature/
   sudo chmod 775 /var/lib/tomcat6/webapps/PlasMapper/dataBase/db_vectorFeature/
   sudo chown root:www-data /var/lib/tomcat6/webapps/PlasMapper/html/feature.html
   sudo chmod 664 /var/lib/tomcat6/webapps/PlasMapper/html/feature.html
   #  Now, plasmid features are ready to be searched by MyLabStocks via BLAST queries.
   cd ../../..

Now you have a PlasMapper instance available here:
http://your_server:8080/PlasMapper.


Install MyLabStocks
-------------------

Now your are ready to install the core of MyLabStocks. It consists of
a set of php scripts that you have to deploy on your apache server. To
do that, type the following commands in a targeted server terminal.

   sudo rsync -cauvz mylabstocks/src/ /var/www/labstocks/
   sudo rm /var/www/labstocks/install_db.phpsh
   sudo touch /var/www/labstocks/formatdb.log
   sudo chmod 440 /var/www/labstocks/connect_entry.php
   sudo mkdir /var/www/labstocks/plasmid_files
   sudo mkdir /var/www/labstocks/raw_dirs
   sudo mkdir /var/www/labstocks/collections
   sudo chown -R www-data:www-data /var/www/labstocks/connect_entry.php /var/www/labstocks/formatdb.log  /var/www/labstocks/plasmid_files /var/www/labstocks/raw_dirs
   echo "Alias /blast /var/www/blast/" > /tmp/blast.conf
   echo "<Directory /var/www/blast/>" > /tmp/blast.conf
   echo "   Options +ExecCGI" >> /tmp/blast.conf
   echo "</Directory>" >> /tmp/blast.conf
   echo "AddHandler cgi-script .cgi" >> /tmp/blast.conf
   sudo cp /tmp/blast.conf /etc/apache2/conf.d/blast.conf
   sudo ln -s ../conf.d/blast.conf /etc/apache2/conf-available/blast.conf
   sudo ln -s ../conf-available/blast.conf /etc/apache2/conf-enabled/blast.conf
   rm /tmp/blast.conf


Configure MyLabStocks
---------------------

For obvious security reasons, it is essential that you now update
connexion parameters by editing the script:
/var/www/labstocks/connect_entry.php

In this script you have to update the following constants:

   * SERVEUR

   * NOM

   * BASE

   * PASSE

   * LABNAME

   sudo vi /var/www/labstocks/connect_entry.php

We have prepared the following script to help you define passwords and
instantiate the database. This script will ask you to choose a
password for basic and administrative access. To use this script,
simply type the following command line:

   sudo php mylabstocks/src/install_db.phpsh

Congratulations! Your MyLabStocks instance is now available here:
http://your_server/labstocks.

Go to http://your_server/labstocks/wwwblast.php to initialize blast
databases.


Links
-----

*MyLabStocks* home, repository and documentation:
https://github.com/fchuffar/mylabstocks

Gael Yvert lab: http://www.ens-lyon.fr/LBMC/gisv/


Usage
=====


Advanced Search
---------------

In the strain section, the form *Search in genotype* filters strains
where the fields *locus1*, *locus2*, *locus3*, *locus4*, *locus5*,
*ADE2*, *HIS3*, *LE  U2*, *LYS2*, *MET15*, *TRP1*, *URA3*, *HO_*,
*Cytoplasmic_Character* or *extrachromosomal_plasmid* contain the
given expression. This filter is case insensitive.


Plasmids Sequences Management
-----------------------------

Even in edit mode, users are not granted permission to directly edit a
plasmid sequence, nor the URL to the plasmid sequence file. If a new
sequence must be entered instead of the current one, users must upload
a new sequence file, in .gb or .gb.gz format. MyLabStocks then
automatically reads the file and update the sequence field and the
URL. This ensures consistency between URL, sequence and the file
itself.


Reporting Bugs
--------------

If you think you have found a bug and would like to report the
problem, then please ensure you have applied all applicable updates.
If this is the case, send a description of your problem and some
screenshot to florent.chuffart on its gmail.com email. Thank you for
your contribution.


Backing up the Mysql Database and Stored Files
----------------------------------------------

We HIGHLY RECOMMEND THAT YOU REGULARLY BACKUP your MyLabStocks
database. We provide two levels of backup. The first one dumps only
the MySQL database. The second one also adds the items' files that
were uploaded on the server (plasmid_files and raw_dirs directories
from your /var/www/labstocks directory). These two features are
available on the bottom of each entry page. The two links in the
sentence *Backup the entire system or only the database NOW!* allow
any user to download the requested backups. It could be useful for an
administrator to integrate it in a robust file backup system using,
for example, a cron that regularly pull the archives (wget
http://.../labstocks/backup.php?FULL_BACK=1). A third link allow you
to export the current table in ''csv'' format.


How To Restore System From Backup
---------------------------------

On the targeted server, you can restore the database from the last
backup file ''labstocks_db.sql'' by typing the following command in a
terminal. Not that you need administrator priviledges on the server to
do that. This will drop existing tables, create new ones and populate
them with data. You need to adapt user, password and database names
according to your settings.

   sudo mysql --user=root --password=root labstocks_db < labstocks_db.sql

To restore the uploaded files, you have to copy backed-up directories
(''plasmid_files'' and ''raw_dirs'') to the labstocks directory of
your server. To do that, on the targeted server, type the following
commands in a terminal.

   sudo cp -r plasmid_files raw_dirs /var/www/labstocks/.


Extend Database
---------------

MyLabstocks is delivered under a free licence. Feel free to modify and
extend it to meet the needs of your lab. To do that you can create new
tables using phpMyAdmin (http://your_server/phpmyadmin) or mysql
command line tools (documentation here
http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.6/en/mysql.html). MyLabStocks uses
the  framework phpMyEdit to manage the user interface. You can use the
provided tool (http://your_server/phpMyEditSetup.php) to generate
code. You can learn how to customize the interface by reading the
phpMyEdit embedded documentation
(http://your_server/labstocks/doc/html/).


Adding New Boxes In The Box Manager
-----------------------------------

Tu add new boxes in the box manager you have to connect to the box
manager in super user mode (or asking to your admin to). In this
contexte, at the top of the page appears a link ''Add a new box for
your Liquid N2 storage''. Follow this link, fill the form and click
the button ''Add this new box''.


Modifying The Session Duration
------------------------------

To modify the session duration, edit the connect_entry.php
configuration file and modify the SESSION_DURATION default value.


Extracting the genotypes of multiple strains when preparing a publication
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Log in with superuser priviledges. Go to the strains tab, click on the
'extract genotypes' link above the table Enter IDs of strains to be
retrieved, separated by blank space or commas. Click on 'extract
genotypes' button.


Clearing Existing Values and Start Over
---------------------------------------

Existing values can be deleted from the admin tab using the superuser
password. By doing so, you have to take care of the order in which you
delete entries. For example, your are allowed to delete an "author"
only if this author is no longer associated with any item entry
("strain", "lab book", ...). It is therefore necessary to first delete
these item entries befor this author. Existing entries can also be
deleted via SQL requests or through the phpMyAdmin graphical
interface, using the DUMP TABLE command.


Linking Plasmids and Oligos
---------------------------

User is able to link the strains to plasmids and oligos easily using
"Relevant Plasmids" and "Relevant Oligos" fields in the strains table.
In "add" or "edit" mode, this fields must be filled with corresponding
IDs, separated using comas or spaces. When it is recorded, for a given
strain, this fields is parsed in "edit" and "view" mode. Links appear
just above the given strain table. Users have to click on the IDs to
be redirected to the corresponding plasmid or oligo page.
